So, the first two years of the business,
we focused on working with individual
taxi drivers and taxi companies, and we
had very good progress [music] with
that. But, after 2 years, I remember
there was this
important meeting where we met the
biggest taxi company in Serbia, and I
clearly realized walking in that these
people are the mafia. There's a pistol
on the table. They don't care about
[music] customers at all.
And I realized after that meeting flying
back that we are never going to work
with these kind of [music] companies
again. We need to pivot. We need to work
with people who actually want to serve
customers well, and we [music] really
changed the strategy of the business
after that, and we never looked back.
My name is Markus Villig. [music] I'm
the founder and CEO of Bolt, the leading
mobility platform across Europe, the
Middle East, and Africa.
On the personal side, I [music] was just
completely frustrated by the experience
I saw in Tallinn. Every time I needed to
use a taxi to get anywhere as a
teenager, it was a horrible experience.
And if you design the bad experience, I
mean, that's effective what you would
design. I mean, there was 20 small
companies you had to call. They didn't
even pick up. Even if they did pick up,
the car almost never made it to you or
came with a huge delay.
And then the cars were really in bad
shape. The drivers were very rude, and
it was just really a horrible
experience, not to mention the payment,
and you had to always carry cash on you
and so on. So, it was just all around a
very bad experience. And then I started
to think whether that could actually be
a good business opportunity. I was 19.
>> [music]
>> So, really a teenager in high school. I
didn't have any experience, any
connections, any
real resources to speak of, and I
figured that I needed the first 5,000
euros to get the product off the ground.
To hire a developer to help me build a
prototype, and also have some money for
initial marketing. And then, since I
didn't know any investors, I went to my
parents and asked if they were willing
to lend me or or invest in the business
about 5,000. And that was a funny
episode where they thought about it for
quite a while because that was a big sum
of money for for us back then, and
initially they said that they're willing
to to make this loan for me, but that
comes at my own personal risk. And then
if I screw it up and all this money is
gone, then I can't cover my own rent
during university.
Initial start was very humble. I went on
the streets of Tallinn talking to taxi
drivers one by one. So, [music]
as it goes in most cities around the
world, they're usually waiting in these
hot spots around airports or other sort
of train stations and so on.
So, I just went to them, got in the car,
and started pitching [music] that I have
this idea. Would you like to make
additional income by joining this
platform? You're going to get additional
trips each day, and you're only going to
pay a commission. So, it's a very very
risk-free proposition for you. You don't
have to join with any fixed fees or
anything like that.
And the sales went really poorly, I must
say. [music] So, so that after the first
couple of months, probably 90% of them
told me that they're not interested
because they saw it so risky. I was just
a kid. I didn't even have a product back
then, so I was just pitching a concept.
[music]
But, eventually I I had a couple of
dozen drivers lined up who had given me
their contacts, and they said they're
they're good to go. So, that gave me the
initial
quantity of supply to get the the first
product off the ground in Tallinn.
When we started in 2014, there was
actually very little competition. So,
there was almost no app-based
ride-hailing companies back then.
There was a couple of small ones
starting up in the US and Asia, but
nobody had really made it anything in
Europe.
Not to mention raise any significant
funding or really dominate the industry.
So, we we got into this thinking that it
might not be that competitive an
industry at all.
And of course, a couple years later, it
became the most competitive industry in
tech [music] with our competitors
raising tens of billions of dollars. So,
we didn't really understand what we were
getting into [music] in the beginning.
Over a couple of years, the market of
course transitioned to apps. So,
everybody started hailing ride
digitally. And we had counter-positioned
ourselves in that market by working
together with the taxi companies and
taxi drivers.
Because they were very afraid that new
entrants were coming in, and they were
cutting them out completely. And that
strategy worked well for us for a couple
of years in many countries. But then,
after that pivotal moment where we
finally started to realize that most
taxi companies are not going to make
this transition. They are not never
going to adopt these tools and become
digital.
We thought that we actually have to go
and start to compete against them as
well.
And that was a big risk because you're
effectively starting to go in in some
way start to compete against your own
customers.
And that was a very risky move in some
countries, but looking back, it was the
right decision to do both for the
customers and for us. Our ambition from
day one was that we wanted to build a
company that serves millions of people,
and Estonia is a tiny place. It just has
a population of 1.3 million. So, clearly
we thought that we're just going to
start here. We're going to polish the
product, make it great, and then we're
going to take it international.
And that's exactly what we did. So, the
first 6 months, we focused on really
nailing it in the first few cities here.
We got to meaningful revenue, great
customer traction, and then we thought
that we're ready to start with
expansion.
And then we raised the first round of
about a million euros for for the first
wave of [music] launching the next
cities.
Which looking back seems like a tiny
amount, but back then we thought that
it's all the money we're ever going to
need.
And then we made a huge mistake though.
So, we
we tried to launch in about 10 cities at
once. All the way from the Netherlands
to Finland to Serbia, and we almost
bankrupted the business. So, then at
some point we realized we have to
restart. We have to think about
expansion in a different way.
And what we did was that we threw away
all of our biases. So, instead of
thinking about just going to the
neighboring country, which is the
closest geographically, we looked at the
map of the world. We made a list of the
top few hundred cities in the world, and
we ranked them by characteristics that
we thought from first principles
actually should correlate with what our
product market fit is.
>> [music]
>> So, we ranked them by population, by
availability of private cars and public
transport,
>> [music]
>> so we could have a good proxy for what
the demand side is going to be.
And then we looked at what is the
unemployment rate. So, are there a lot
of people out there who looking for
additional ways to make income?
What is the taxi regulation? Is it easy
for these drivers, if they want to, to
actually get on the road and start
earning, or not? And after actually just
a couple [music] of weeks of this
analysis, all the African cities
actually turned out to be the top of the
list.
Large population, massive need for
alternatives in terms of transportation,
[music]
and very high unemployment. So, clearly
millions of people who would like to
join these kind of platforms to make
additional income. And even though we
had no experience [music] in Africa, and
from the sort of superficial level might
might presume that it's very hard to to
make actually sort of a big business in
in some of these countries with fairly
low income levels, what we realized was
that the volume is so vast, and these
economies are growing so quickly, that
it makes sense for us in the long term
to bet on these countries. And that's
what we did. Once we figured out that
there's
>> [music]
>> this huge new world out there when it
comes to these emerging markets all the
way from South Africa to Nigeria to
Kenya to places like Azerbaijan,
we suddenly realized [music] that the
product market fit there is so great
that we actually need to invest
significantly less. And we were able to
really accelerate the [music] growth of
the business. So, we went from having no
presence in these emerging markets to
suddenly those being more than 50% of
the business in about 6 months.
And
>> [music]
>> we really pivoted the whole management
team attention just to double down on
that and figure out how do we find even
more markets
like this to accelerate.
Back in 2019, there was very little
adoption of food delivery in most of our
countries. And we thought that there's
an opportunity for us to enter and build
a category leader in at least a dozen
countries. And that could be a
multi-billion business over the next few
years. We were actually very lucky that
we launched it just a couple of months
before COVID. So, the initial traction
we had in the first few cities was good.
But then suddenly, the whole world went
into lockdown. And then the ride-sharing
business declined by 85%.
So, you can imagine it was vast majority
of our revenue. We had a thousand
employees, and then you lose 85% of your
business. What most of our competitors
did was that they immediately raised the
rounds, and they also really went after
the costs. And for most of these
companies, the main cost they had was
employees. So, they let go 30% [music]
in some case even 50% of their entire
workforce. And that of course was a big
drain on morale, and these companies
were effectively paralyzed for the next
6 to 12 months. They couldn't do much.
So, what we did was
we thought we're going to take the
gamble. We're not going to let go of a
single person. So, what we did was we we
told the company that we're just going
to be reducing salaries by a flat 20%,
and then people could opt in to take a
bigger cut than that if they could
afford to.
With founders going to zero, and most of
the executives going to zero as well,
just on an opt-in basis. It actually
even made the team much stronger because
everybody in the company realized that
this is an unprecedented health crisis,
and so many people are getting laid off,
and it's economically putting a lot of
stress on them. So, actually we had
hundreds of people opting in to take
quite large meaningful pay cuts, 20, 30,
40%
on top of what we had offered. And
actually brought the team's morale to a
completely new level. And then, once the
company was doing great again, and we
had recovered 9 months later,
we gave especially those people very
generous equity bonuses as well. So,
like that was a very risky bet of
course. I mean, if [music] if it had
taken longer, or delivery wouldn't have
worked out, the company would have been
in real trouble.
But, um
we were very ambitious. We had a lot of
confidence that this is the bet we want
to do as a company. We thought this is
really a crucial moment where you can
actually meaningfully change your
position in the entire market.
And it worked out beautifully.
>> [music]
>> The food delivery business really took
off really rapidly.
And
>> [music]
>> actually, exactly as we imagined, just 6
months later, the first cities in Europe
started opening up, and ride-sharing
[music] was recovering quite nicely.
And because all of our competitors were
[music] so paralyzed from the layoffs,
uh and they weren't really focused, we
were able to take a lot of market share.
So, coming out [music] of COVID, we
tripled our market share relative to
what we had going in.
And I think there's this perfect analogy
that it's very hard to overtake uh
drivers during a normal race, but you
can take overtake a lot of drivers when
it's raining, and I think it was exactly
what happened during COVID with us.